The Origin of the Universe
Where did everything come from? Everyone has wondered this at some point. It turns out, much more is now understood than ever has been, but there is still much to learn. The prevailing scientific explanation for the origin of the universe is usually called the Big Bang theory. In the ninth chapter of  his book, Cosmos, Carl Sagan traced back where an apple pie came from. The molecules are made of atoms. All of the atoms except for hydrogen were fused together in the cores of ancient stars from hydrogen. The hydrogen was formed at the very beginning of the universe, the Big Bang. As Sagan puts it, “If you wish to make an apple pie from scratch, you must first invent the universe.” [9]
Beginning around the year 1917, Albert Einstein applied his theory of general relativity to the universe as a whole. The current thought at the time was that the universe was static and unchanging. Relativity did not match current knowledge of the universe and only made sense on paper at first. A few years later, a new cosmological theory was formulated by Alexander Friedmann. He worked with Einstein’s equations and discovered the prediction that the universe began in a state of extremely high temperature and density several billion years ago. It expanded and cooled down as time went on. This was the beginning of the modern Big Bang theory. [7]
In the late twentieth century, increasing powerful telescopes allowed astronomers to discover that the universe is unimaginably enormous. It contains hundreds of billions of galaxies. They also observed that distant galaxies are moving away from us. Further galaxies are moving away faster. Edwin Hubble was one of the first scientists to notice this phenomenon. Before he observed this, and even decades afterward, most physicists believed the universe was static and unchanging. It has come to be almost universally accepted that this universe had a beginning. [3] If this process had been recorded and could be played backward, we would see the galaxies closer together in earlier times. If you go back far enough, they all approach a single point. When time plays forward at this point, an enormous amount of energy is produces as the universe begins expanding. [1] It appears that Einstein’s theory of relativity was consistent with reality. These new observations were the first real world evidence of the Big Bang.

A two-dimensional representation of the universe. The white dots represent galaxies at one time, and the brown dots represent them having moved by some other time. If the universe is expanding, inhabitants of any given galaxy would observe every other galaxy moving away from them, with a galaxy’s distance proportional to the rate at which it moves away. This is what is observed from the Milky Way, leading scientists to the conclusion that the universe is expanding.

The idea that the universe had a beginning was controversial for a long time among scientists. It had long been held that the universe was in a “steady state”. Even after the universe was shown to be expanding, physicists such as Fred Hoyle still argued for a static universe. This model required new matter to be added constantly, but at an undetectably small rate. Hoyle went as far as to develop a theory of how atoms could occasionally materialize. Hoyle argued that this was much less of a leap beyond conventional physics then to think everything was made “in one go”. As knowledge was gathered, the Steady State model of the universe began to fall apart, with more and more evidence supporting the Big Bang. Radio telescopes detected much stronger signals emitted by distant galaxies then by closer ones. These further galaxies appeared to be at earlier stages in their evolution then nearer ones, because the light from distant galaxies takes billions of years to reach us, we see them as they were billions of years ago. They appear to just be forminm. Observations of this were consistent with the Big Bang model of the universe. [6]
The Big Bang hypothesis was first proposed in 1927 by Belgian Astronomer George-Henri Lemaitre. The term itself was coined by Sir Fred Hoyle, scoffing at the idea. Despite the early criticism, many experiments and observations since the 1920s support the Big Bang theory. [1]
In the 1960s, Princeton physicist Robert Dicke predicts leftover radiant energy from the Big Bang. Just a few years later, New Jersey scientists Robert W. Wilson and Arno A. Penzias detected this microwave radiation entirely by accident. They didn’t even realize what this signal was until they learned about Dicke’s prediction. They still won a Nobel Prize for the discovery of the universe’s cosmic microwave background radiation. This discovery reinforced the Big Bang theory. Scientists also predicted that there would be nonconformity in the background radiation, because obviously, the universe is not completely uniform. This was tested in 1989 with the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) project. A satellite was used to create a high resolution “map” of the radiation. The project was successful. In 1992, the image dubbed a “fossil of creation” made front page papers around the world. The experiment was repeated a decade later, yielding an even more detailed map of the early universe. [1]

The top image is the COBE image released in 1992. The bottom is from the WMAP project a decade later. The heterogeneities in the images are the beginning of galaxies forming.

   The Cosmic Microwave Background was actually caused about 380,000 years after the Big Bang. The maps above show the structure of the early universe at this time. Before then, the matter in the universe consisted of free electrons and protons. The universe was hazy and light waves were blocked by this fog. When the universe finally cooled enough, protons and electrons formed the first atoms, allowing electromagnetic radiation to rush outward. This burst of energy is what Wilson and Penzias detected. [2]
   A common, and very good question, is “What caused the Big Bang?”  Well, physicists can’t seem to agree what the answer to this question is. Many ideas have been put forth. This paper will proceed to examine some of them.
   Stephen Hawking is one of the world’s most prominent physicists. In his most recent book, The Grand Design, [3] he discusses many topics relevant to this essay. In the first chapter, he discusses M-theory as a possible “theory of everything”. M-theory is basically several theories lumped together. Each of the component “string theories” holds true for some range of physical situations. M-theory predicts that many universes will form spontaneously. Different universes will follow different histories, most being very unlike our own. Every possible universe might exist, separate from our own.
Not everyone accepts M-theory though. One of its biggest critics is Dr. Lawrence M. Krauss. In his book, Hiding in the Mirror, [4] Dr. Krauss discussed the problems with String Theory. M-theory doesn’t make any predictions that are testable. Unlike with quantum mechanics or relativity, no one has been able to create a feasible experiment in which String Theory would predict results any different from other theories. String Theory, which forms the basis of M-theory, seems to be neither verifiable nor falsifiable. Krauss has said that M-theory is “Not a Theory of Everything, but a Theory of Anything!”
Quantum Theory makes the universe seem unpredictable. In the double-slit experiment, in which molecules are fired at a foil with two slits in it through which they might pass, molecules (buckyball’s are a kind of molecule often used) will sometimes land somewhere in the middle of where they should, had they gone through one slit or the other. It is as though the molecules don’t follow a certain path. Hawking writes, “…an object’s position, path, and even its past and future are not precisely determined.” What does this have to do with the origin of the universe? Well, as we approach the very beginning, the entire universe was theoretically compressed into such a volume in which Quantum Theory applies. In Quantum Theory, nothing is certain. The buckyball’s location might be pinned down by observing it, and it will go through one of the slits, but it’s not observed, it takes all paths. At the quantum level, the past is not definite. So, the universe does not have a single past, according to quantum mechanics. [3] Describing quantum mechanics also has the effect of making an undergraduate’s head hurt.

 A molecule will take multiple paths in the double-slit experiment.
Later in the book, Hawking describes how Einstein’s theories imply the unification of space and time. When the universe was small enough for quantum theory to apply, it was also massive enough for relativity to apply. Under these extreme conditions, space-time is warped so much that “time behaves like another dimension of space”. People often ask, “What came before the Big Bang?” It appears that there may not have been a “before”. At the very beginning, time did not exist as we know it. Human experience does not apply to the very early universe. Our usual perceptions aren’t consistent with the reality of such extreme circumstances. Hawking makes a comparison that makes the concept easier to understand. Asking what came before the Big Bang is like asking what is south of the South Pole. There is nothing south of the South Pole because there no south at this point. Likewise, there is no before the Big Bang, because there is no time before it.
Now the part about quantum theory begins to apply to the Big Bang. Recall that at a quantum level, a particle will take all possible paths, only choosing one when it is observed. Applying this logic to the early, tiny universe began in every possible way. This would mean that an infinite number of universes exist. This is called the multiverse concept. Different universes would have different physical laws. This would explain why our universe formed the way it did. It would be one of an infinite number. Of course, we live in a universe hospitable to life. We would never have evolved otherwise.
Dr. Krauss has presented his own thoughts on why the universe came to be. In a lecture he gave, he discussed the formation of the universe and why it is here. [5] Krauss tells how he tried to find the shape of the universe, so he could know how it might end. When we look at how the universe ends, we also learn about its beginning. Everything depends heavily on the shape of the universe. There are three possibilities. If there is enough mass in the universe, space-time will curve into itself, closing the universe (This would eventually cause the universe to collapse back into itself). If there is less mass then the critical amount, the universe is open (And ends by tearing itself apart, because of Dark Energy). Krauss’s hypothesis is that the universe must be flat, because if so, the negative energy causes by gravity will be exactly equal in magnitude to the positive energy (of the matter and energy) in the universe. This would make the total amount of energy in the universe zero. This would mean that if you were to add up everything that exists in our universe, you would get nothing. A flat universe is the only one that can come from nothing. If the universe is indeed flat, its existence makes perfect sense.

Possible shapes of the universe.? represents the ratio of actual mass to the amount it would take to make the universe flat.
How does Krauss’s hypothesis stand up against scientific testing? Well, it turns out, quite well. He describes how it appears that gravity in galaxies is much stronger than it should be. Scientists have inferred that some mysterious matter causes this gravitational effect. It is called “dark matter”. If you add all the dark matter and the kind of matter we are familiar with together, you’ll get a value that is about 30% of what it would take for the universe to be flat. At first, one might think Krauss was wrong, but it turns out, there is something else that needs to be taken into account.
While, conventional logic tells us the universe’s rate of expansion should be slowing down due to the force of gravity, it’s actually speeding up. The force causing this acceleration has been dubbed “dark energy”. Dark matter and dark energy are very mysterious. Quite frankly, scientists have no idea what they really are, and yet they make up about 95% of the known universe. Despite the mystery of these things, they have been measured. If you take the amount of dark energy that would account for the universe’s accelerating expansion and add it to the matter (dark and otherwise), you’ll get just the right amount of total energy to make the universe flat.
    There is even more evidence for a flat universe. Krauss also describes how the universe’s geometric has actually been measured directly. By placing a large triangle on the surface of the earth, we can measure its geometry. Because the earth is a curved surface, the angles of the triangle will be enlarged, and add up to more than 180°. This same principle works with the three dimensional universe. Recall how the cosmic microwave background radiation is full of nonconformities, or “lumps”. In a closed universe, the light from these galaxies would have been distorted in such a way that the lumps would look bigger then they do. In an open universe, the lumps would look smaller. The size of these lumps is consistent with Krauss’s hypothesis. The universe is flat.
   An age old philosophical question is, “Why is there something rather than nothing?” Dr. Krauss attempts to give an answer based on physics in this lecture. Early on, he shows an animation of the empty space inside a proton. It shows how “virtual particles” seem to come in and out of existence. As I’ve said earlier, quantum physics is really weird. These quantum fluctuations occur where there is “nothing” as we understand it. “Nothing” is inherently unstable. Given that the total of everything in the universe is essentially nothing, it actually makes sense that “something” can come from “nothing”. With quantum fluctuations, it is unavoidable. Given nothing, you get a universe.
   Yet another model of the universe is the Cyclic model. It seems similar to an idea of an oscillating universe, which now seems unlikely, since the universe is probably flat and space-time will not curve back into itself. In the Steinhart-Turok model, dark energy accelerates the universe’s expansion for trillions of years, until other factors far beyond the scope of this paper (having to do with M-theory) bring the acceleration to a halt, followed by a universal collapse. After this, there will be a moment of stability, followed by another Big Bang. The mathematics behind this model would explain dark energy, according to the physicists behind the theory. With the cyclic model, there is no beginning of time. The universe is eternal and goes through endless cycles. [8] There are of course, problems with this theory. It relies heavily on M-theory, which is not well understood.
   Since this beginning of the last century, science has learned much about the universe we live in. We now understand that it began, at least in its current form, around 13.7 billion years ago, and has been expanding ever since. There is a consensus that this happened and a good explanation, with an abundance of supporting evidence, of how it happened. What may be much more intriguing, is why it happened. Many scientists think it was unavoidable, but for different reasons. Proponents of M-theory would say that it had to have happened because string theory causes all possible universes to form. Others believe that it was inevitable because “nothing” is physically unstable and must produce a flat universe, such as ours. While Hawking believes that time itself began to exist at the moment of the Big Bang, so there is no “before”, Steinhardt and Turok think that the universe goes through cycles lasting trillions of years, but it ultimately infinite in age.

Many people still want to know exactly how and why the universe exists. Unfortunately, there are many conflicting ideas. Perhaps in the next few generations, a unifying theory that perfectly explains this issue will be developed. The answer to the questions posed today may seem obvious to the people of the future, but as of April 19, 2011, no one can be completely sure. Despite how much has been learned, the unknown is still vastly greater than the known. For the time being, the origin of the universe remains shrouded in controversy and mystery.
References


