Parfit examines the fact that our universe appears to be “fine-tuned” for life, why our 

universe is that way, and how that might relate to the existence of local universes causally 

detached from our own. In this paper, I will briefly summarize Parfit’s conclusions, as well as 

explain and critique the idea of a Selector principle, as described towards the end of Parfit’s 

paper.

First, we will look at the main arguments that Parfit makes in his paper. He reasons that 

“fine-tuning” must be surprising, because it seems implausible that the microscopic possibility 

for a universe to contain life would actually obtain. Either it is a massive coincidence or there is 

some other explanation. (Parfit, pg. 419) He discusses many possible explanations for “fine-

tuning” by investigating the possible existence of local universes causally detached from our 

own. He groups together all local universes that exist as one “global possibility”, as opposed to a 

“local possibility”, which is how a particular local universe is. One conclusion that he makes is 

that if a global possibility of many such local universes did exist, then that would be an 

explanation for why our universe is fine-tuned. He believes that this many-worlds hypothesis 

would reduce the arbitrariness of our fine-tuned universe because there are many universes out 

there and at least one of them is bound to have life. (Parfit, pg. 419-420)

Next I am going to go over Parfit’s paper’s major contribution to multiverse theory. Parfit 

wants us to look at the idea of an abstract “Selector” principle that can explain why a certain 

“global possibility” is the way that it is. On that view, if the layout of a global possibility has a 

certain pattern to it and that global possibility obtains, then the fact that reality is that way cannot 

be a mere coincidental brute fact. In fact, on the Selector view, then that pattern is a selector 

principle that explains why that global possibility obtains. (Parfit, pg. 424) Parfit states that the 

reason why the selector explains why a global possibility obtains must necessarily not be an 

“ordinary causal claim”, because causal events, by the very definition of local universes, are 

necessarily bound to a particular local universe and thus cannot operate on a meta-universe level. 

(Parfit, pg. 422) However, it does have some feature of a causal claim. According to Parfit, we 

can rewrite any causal claim “A causes B” as “If A, then B”. We can also rewrite the Selector 

principle as “If the global possibility that obtains would adhere better to the Selector principle if 

it had C feature, then the global possibility that obtains would have that feature”. He writes that 

the reader may still find this explanation mysterious but then again, causality even in everyday 

scenarios seems to be a fairly peculiar concept in general. (Parfit, pg. 423) Parfit also does not 

want us to imagine the Selector being some kind of “hidden machinery” existing outside of all 

local universes, because he finds it banal how a global possibility is selected. We know that a 

particular global possibility must obtain. Without resorting to inventing some kind of 

metaphysical extra-universal machinery that can select such a global possibility, we know that 

logically a global possibility exists; the question then is therefore why that particular global 

possibility obtains, not how that particular possibility obtains. (Parfit, pg. 425)

Examples of patterned global possibilities with corresponding Selector principles that 

Parfit lists in the paper include the Axiarchic view that our global possibility obtains because it is 

the best configuration out of all global possibilities. There is also the opposite of the Axiarchic 

view, which is that our global possibility obtains because it is the worst configuration out of all 

global possibilities. Parfit also suggests the Maximal view that our global possibility obtains 

because it contains every possible local possibility and therefore is maximally diverse. The 

reverse of the Maximal view is the Null possibility that our global possibility obtains because it 

contains no local possibilities. Some physicists also suggest Mathematical beauty as a Selector. 

On that view, our global possibility obtains, because it is the most mathematically beautiful way 

for the laws of the universe to have been. These examples are plausible selectors, as opposed to 

more arbitrarily patterned universes like a global possibility containing 57 local universes, 

because if those more plausible patterns obtained, it would be reasonable to assume that those 

patterns existed for a reason and were not simply coincidence. On the contrary, the number 57 

may have some interesting mathematical properties, but there is nothing about the number 57 

that implies that it is the reason why that global possibility obtains. (Parfit, pg. 424) 

What if there is no Selector? Then that would mean that the global possibility that obtains 

is arbitrary and random. Thus, the global possibility that obtains would have no explanation. We 

would therefore have a global possibility containing some arbitrary number of local universes, 

each with some arbitrary details. One of them just happens to be our life-bearing universe. There 

would be no answer to the question of why our universe is fined-tuned for life. Parfit calls this 

view the “Brute Fact View”. Parfit thinks that this view is not tenable, as per the logic of the 

Selector principle. However, he thinks that it may be necessary to take a “Brute Fact View” with 

regards to the question of “Why this particular Selector and not any other?”, in that we have to 

take it as a brute fact that our Selector is our Selector. That would mean it was completely 

arbitrary that we happened to have this Selector as opposed to another possible Selector. This is 

because, for any Selector, such a principle cannot explain itself, because that would be 

tautological. Plus, it is not clear whether any Selector is metaphysically necessary, as it is 

logically consistent for any Selector principle to not be the actual Selector for our global 

possibility. If the “Brute Fact View” with regards to Selector principles is true, it also serves to 

disqualify the “Brute Fact View” with regards to global possibilities, because it is not clear why 

“no Selector” would be randomly chosen out of a set including all reasonable Selectors plus the 

“no Selector” option, independently of an independent reason to believe that our global 

possibility is arbitrary. (Parfit, pg. 425-426)

I object to the idea of a Selector principle that Parfit posits. A Selector principle is bound 

to a global possibility and explains the particular pattern of that global possibility. However, in 

the same way that we can group local possibilities into a global possibility, we can also group 

global possibilities into meta-global possibilities. In this view, each meta-global possibility has a 

meta-Selector that chooses the particular pattern of Selector principles distributed among the 

global possibilities encapsulated within the meta-global possibility. Thus, if it is possible to 

reason about the metaphysical existence of Selectors and other local possibilities outside of our 

own local universe the way that Parfit does in his paper, it is also possible to reason about meta-

Selectors and meta-global possibilities in the way that I have done. We can apply the same logic 

to create meta-meta-Selectors and meta-meta-global possibilities and so on. It then becomes 

unclear at which level to stop positing new metaphysical entities and then take that metaphysical 

conception of reality as brute fact. Parfit dismisses meta-Selectors out of hand as being 

unexplainable and takes the existence of a Selector as a brute fact. However, we could also have 

stopped at the fifth level of regress, the zeroth level of regress (which is taking the existence of 

our local world as a brute fact), or just accepted infinite regress. There is no reason from inside 

the explanation of what a Selector is, that we should prefer stopping at one level over another. 

However, there is an independent reason why we should stop at the zeroth level of regress and 

say that there is no such thing as a Selector. If the idea of a Selector leads to inexplicable 

arbitrariness in an effort to stop infinite regression, or an absurd commitment to infinite levels of 

meta-universes, then there does not seem to be a good reason why we should prefer that 

metaphysical view over a simpler default metaphysical view that takes our local universe as a 

brute fact.

Parfit shows how we can reason about metaphysical entities that do not exist in our local 

universe. He claims that multiple local universes would explain our universe’s fine-tuning and 

further that a Selector principle can explain the layout of a global possibility. However, I think 

that Selectors are untenable because they lead to more metaphysical headaches than they solve, 

due to the fact that we can apply the Selector principle to Selectors over and over again, leading 

to either a new kind of metaphysical arbitrariness in an effort to stop infinite regression or the 

ludicrous commitment to infinite layers of meta-universes.
